Document air_quality triggers & conditions (#44955)
home-assistant/home-assistant.github.io: source/_triggers/air_quality.pm4_crossed_threshold.markdown

---
title: "PM4 level crossed threshold"
trigger: air_quality.pm4_crossed_threshold
domain: air_quality
description: "Triggers after one or more PM4 levels cross a threshold."
related_triggers:
  - air_quality.pm4_changed
---

The **PM4 level crossed threshold** trigger fires when the PM4 (particulate matter 4 micrometers or smaller) reading on one or more air quality sensors crosses a specific level. PM4 sits between the finest particles (PM2.5) and the coarser dust and pollen (PM10), capturing a range of irritants that affect breathing and comfort. Sources include household dust, pollen, mold spores, and cooking emissions.

> Think of a nursery where clean air really matters. This trigger lets you boost the air filter to high speed the moment PM4 levels rise, or send a notification to your phone when spring pollen pushes particle counts past your comfort level. Your home stays one step ahead, keeping the air cleaner for young children and anyone with allergies.

Reviewer: We can drop the "home" personification:

```suggestion
Think of a nursery where clean air really matters. This trigger lets you boost the air filter to high speed the moment PM4 levels rise, or send a notification to your phone when spring pollen pushes particle counts past your comfort level. You stay one step ahead, keeping the air cleaner for young children and anyone with allergies.
```

  required: true
  type: any
behavior:
  description: >
    When multiple sensors are targeted, controls when the trigger fires. Accepts `any`, `first`, or `last`.
  required: true
  type: string
  default: any
for:
  description: >
    How long the reading must remain past the threshold before the trigger fires. Accepts a duration string in `HH:MM:SS` format.
  required: true
  type: string
  default: "00:00:00"
{% endoptions_yaml %}

{% include triggers/targets.md %}

{% include triggers/behavior.md %}

## Good to know

- The trigger fires on any crossing, up or down. If you only want one direction, add a condition that checks whether the current PM4 level is above or below your threshold.
- PM4 sits between PM2.5 and PM10 in particle size. If your sensor reports multiple particulate sizes, combining thresholds for each gives you a more complete picture of air quality.
- Pair this trigger with [PM4 level changed](/triggers/air_quality.pm4_changed/) if you also want to track smaller fluctuations between crossings.

{% include triggers/try_it.md %}

{% include triggers/more_examples.md %}

### Automation: protect the nursery by boosting the air filter

> Young children are more sensitive to airborne particles. This automation switches the nursery air filter to high speed the moment PM4 crosses 30, keeping the room cleaner so little ones breathe easier.

Reviewer: Simplify idiom:

```suggestion
Young children are more sensitive to airborne particles. This automation switches the nursery air filter to high speed the moment PM4 crosses 30, keeping the room cleaner so your children breathe easier.
```
